Medium-chain acyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase (MCAD) deficiency is an inherited disorder that prevents your body from breaking down certain fats and turning them into energy. Your metabolism involves the processes your body uses to produce energy. MCAD deficiency can cause problems with your metabolism.

If left untreated, MCAD deficiency may lead to severe lack of energy and tiredness, liver disease, coma, and other serious health problems. Also, the level of sugar in your blood can drop dangerously low — a condition called hypoglycemia. Prevention and prompt treatment are essential regardless of blood sugar level. If you have MCAD deficiency, a sudden episode, called a metabolic crisis, can be caused by common illnesses, high fever, stomach problems or going too long without eating, known as prolonged fasting.

MCAD deficiency is present from birth and is a lifelong condition. In the United States, all states test for MCAD deficiency at birth as part of newborn screening. Many other countries also provide routine newborn screening for MCAD deficiency. If MCAD deficiency is diagnosed and treated early, the disorder can be well managed through diet and lifestyle.

Symptoms
MCAD deficiency is usually first identified in babies and young children. In rare cases, the disorder is not diagnosed until adulthood.

Symptoms can vary among people with MCAD deficiency. They may include:

Vomiting.
Low or no energy.
Weak feeling.
Low blood sugar.
A sudden severe episode, called a metabolic crisis, can be due to:

Going too long without eating.
Missing meals.
Common infections.
High fever.
Ongoing stomach and digestive problems that may cause vomiting and diarrhea.
Intense exercise.
When to see a doctor
In the United States and many other countries, newborn screening programs test for MCAD deficiency. After your first evaluation, you may be referred to a specialist in evaluating and treating MCAD deficiency. You may also be referred to other health care team members, such as a registered dietitian.

Contact your health care team if you've been diagnosed with MCAD deficiency and have a high fever, no appetite, stomach or digestive symptoms, or a planned medical procedure that requires fasting.
